OpenXR: Add documentation page about the new composition layers (#9373)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/xr/openxr_composition_layers.rst

.. note::
    See the `GUI in 3D <https://github.com/godotengine/godot-demo-projects/tree/master/viewport/gui_in_3d>`_
    example project for an example of this approach.

The problem with displaying the viewport in this way is that the rendered result
is sampled for lens distortion by the XR runtime and the resulting quality loss 
can make UI text hard to read.

OpenXR offers a solution to this problem through composition layers.
With composition layers it is possible for the contents of a viewport to be projected
on a surface after lens distortion resulting in a much higher quality end result.

.. note::
    As not all XR runtimes support all composition layer types,
    Godot implements a fallback solution where we render the viewport
    as part of the normal scene but with the aforementioned quality
    limitations.

.. warning::
    When the composition layer is supported,
    it is the XR runtime that presents the subviewport.
    This means the UI is only visible in the headset,
    it will not be accessible by Godot and will thus
    not be shown when you have a spectator view on the desktop.

There are currently 3 nodes that expose this functionality:

> - :ref:`OpenXRCompositionLayerCylinder <class_OpenXRCompositionLayerCylinder>` shows the contents of the SubViewport on the inside of a cylinder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`OpenXRCompositionLayerCylinder <class_OpenXRCompositionLayerCylinder>` shows the contents of the SubViewport on the inside of a cylinder (or "slice" of a cylinder).
```

> - :ref:`OpenXRCompositionLayerEquirect <class_OpenXRCompositionLayerEquirect>` shows the contents of the SubViewport on a warped rectangle.

Reviewer: I think describing an equirect as the interior of sphere makes it easiest to understand:

```suggestion
- :ref:`OpenXRCompositionLayerEquirect <class_OpenXRCompositionLayerEquirect>` shows the contents of the SubViewport on the interior of a sphere (or "slice" of a sphere).
```

Author: I just copied these descriptions from the class definition, so I think if we change it here, we should also change it on the class?

Reviewer: Oops, probably my fault then. :-) Yeah, we should update it there as well.

Author: I'll adjust it here and then we can update the documentation later.

returns our location in the viewports local coordinate system:

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

    func _intersect_to_viewport_pos(intersect : Vector2) -> Vector2i:
        if layer_viewport and intersect != NO_INTERSECTION:
            var pos : Vector2 = intersect * Vector2(layer_viewport.size)
            return Vector2i(pos)
        else:
            return Vector2i(-1, -1)

    ...

The main logic happens in our ``_process`` function.
Here we start by hiding our pointer,
we then check if we have a valid controller and viewport,
and we call ``intersects_ray`` with the position and orientation of our controller:

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

    # Called every frame. 'delta' is the elapsed time since the previous frame.
    func _process(_delta):
        # Hide our pointer, we'll make it visible if we're interacting with the viewport.
        $Pointer.visible = false

        if controller and layer_viewport:
            var controller_t : Transform3D = controller.global_transform
            var intersect : Vector2 = intersects_ray(controller_t.origin, -controller_t.basis.z)

    ...

Next we check if we're intersecting with our viewport.

> If so we check if our button is pressed and place our pointer at our intersection point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If so, we check if our button is pressed and place our pointer at our intersection point.
```

                $Pointer.global_position = pos

    ...

If we were intersecting in our previous process call and our pointer has moved,
we prepare a :ref:`InputEventMouseMotion <class_InputEventMouseMotion>` object
to simulate our mouse moving and send that to our viewport for further processing.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

                if was_intersect != NO_INTERSECTION and intersect != was_intersect:
                    # Pointer moved
                    var event : InputEventMouseMotion = InputEventMouseMotion.new()
                    var from : Vector2 = _intersect_to_viewport_pos(was_intersect)
                    var to : Vector2 = _intersect_to_viewport_pos(intersect)
                    if was_pressed:
                        event.button_mask = MOUSE_BUTTON_MASK_LEFT 
                    event.relative = to - from
                    event.position = to
                    layer_viewport.push_input(event)

    ...

If we've just released our button we also prepare
a :ref:`InputEventMouseButton <class_InputEventMouseButton>` object
to simulate a button release and send that to our viewport for further processing.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

>                 if !is_pressed and was_pressed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                if not is_pressed and was_pressed:
```

                    # Button was let go?
                    var event : InputEventMouseButton = InputEventMouseButton.new()
                    event.button_index = 1
                    event.pressed = false
                    event.position = _intersect_to_viewport_pos(intersect)
                    layer_viewport.push_input(event)

    ...

Or if we've just pressed our button we prepare
a :ref:`InputEventMouseButton <class_InputEventMouseButton>` object
to simulate a button press and send that to our viewport for further processing.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

>                 elif is_pressed and !was_pressed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                elif is_pressed and not was_pressed:
```

                    # Button was pressed?
                    var event : InputEventMouseButton = InputEventMouseButton.new()
                    event.button_index = 1
                    event.button_mask = MOUSE_BUTTON_MASK_LEFT
                    event.pressed = true
                    event.position = _intersect_to_viewport_pos(intersect)
                    layer_viewport.push_input(event)

    ...

Next we remember our state for next frame.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

                was_pressed = is_pressed
                was_intersect = intersect

    ...

Finally, if we aren't intersecting, we simply clear our state.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

            else:
                was_pressed = false
                was_intersect = NO_INTERSECTION

Hole punching
-------------

> As the composition layer is composited on top of the render result,

Reviewer 3: This is dependent upon the sort order, so it may be worth clarifying that.

Author: It does say that later on:
```
You also need to set ``Sort Order`` to a negative value,
the XR compositor will now draw the viewport first, and then overlay our rendering result.
```

> it can be rendered in front of objects that are actually forward of the viewport.

Reviewer: Is it worth specifically saying something about "virtual hands appearing behind the composition layer"? I feel like that's the first thing developers are going to notice about composition layers in VR.

Author: Well, we do have the screenshot logan provided, it kind of shows that use case.

                    event.position = _intersect_to_viewport_pos(intersect)
                    layer_viewport.push_input(event)

    ...

Or if we've just pressed our button we prepare
a :ref:`InputEventMouseButton <class_InputEventMouseButton>` object
to simulate a button press and send that to our viewport for further processing.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

                elif is_pressed and !was_pressed:
                    # Button was pressed?
                    var event : InputEventMouseButton = InputEventMouseButton.new()
                    event.button_index = 1
                    event.button_mask = MOUSE_BUTTON_MASK_LEFT
                    event.pressed = true
                    event.position = _intersect_to_viewport_pos(intersect)
                    layer_viewport.push_input(event)

    ...

Next we remember our state for next frame.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

                was_pressed = is_pressed
                was_intersect = intersect

    ...

Finally, if we aren't intersecting, we simply clear our state.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

            else:
                was_pressed = false
                was_intersect = NO_INTERSECTION

> Hole punching

Reviewer 3: It may be worth giving a use-case to illustrate how this is being used in actual project (e.g: adding a virtual window to the environment with passthrough in the 'background'.

Reviewer 4: I said I was on board with this use case last night at the XR meeting but I need to run that back: hole punched composition layers aren't the correct method for a "window into a virtual world". Since a subviewport can't be rendered in stereo to make it look actually 3D. If you wanted to achieve that effect you'd be better off having the "virtual world" be the main scene, and then have everything that isn't the window be covered up by (hole punched) geometry passthrough.

The main point of hole punching in composition layers is to just let things be displayed in front of the composition layer, like hand models, etc. Adding that use case would make sense.

Author: @devloglogan actually for those type of use cases you're better off rendering geometry directly with the shadow to opacity option and skip composition layers all together.

Hole punching in relation to composition layers is purely meant to allow the composition layer to be rendered behind the main content so that you can have virtual foreground objects occlusion part of the content of the composition layer.

Right now composition layers are always visible on top even if they clip through geometry.

Reviewer 4: @BastiaanOlij I totally agree, and was attempting to say as much in my previous comment. :) Would not use composition layers when going for that use case.

Author: Ah we're on the same page then :)

-------------

> This is a feature that is specifically targeted at AR use cases as it requires our

Reviewer 3: I'd add `MR` in addition to `AR` in that sentence to avoid giving the impression we're only referring to AR glasses:

> This is a feature that is specifically targeted at AR and MR use cases...

Author: As mentioned during the XR meeting, should have written this down before :) In my humble opinion I want to avoid the MR terminology here. AR and VR reference two distinct approaches, VR referencing fully immersive virtual worlds, while AR references any approach where the real world is augmented with virtual content.

Just for completeness sake in for this discussion, XR is a grouping term that was adopted by Khronos and as such by a part of the industry (including by Godot).

MR is a confusing term that means something different depending on who you talk to.
- Originally it referred to mixing real world capture with virtual world capture to create a composite such as solutions as MixCast, Liv and Oculus own Mixed Reality iPad app implement.
- Then Microsoft adopted MR to mean Mixed Reality as the name for their WMR platform, in this case defining it as a platform supported both AR (through Hololens) and VR (through other WMR devices, none of which do passthrough I believe). I also guess they hoped people would see it as an abbreviation of Microsoft Reality, but that's pure speculation on my part :)
- Then in most recent years MR meaning Mixed Reality has become an alternative to XR as an encompassing term for people who don't like the XR moniker.
- And finally, Meta seems to have rebranded it recently to specifically mean AR through the means of passthrough though I am not sure if that has created more clarification or more confusion in the market space. All though Metas marketing here IMHO is inconsistent as its also often referring to the above meaning as a catch all for AR and VR.

So MR in its meaning in the context of this document as I understand it, e.g. AR through passthrough, is a meaning that is fairly contested.

As Godot is a platform agnostic development tool and we try not to care **how** AR is achieved but want our applications to be portable between various AR devices, it is my personal opinion that AR in this context is sufficient capturing all use cases of this feature, while MR is confusing.

There are features that are only possible on devices that use a camera feed to achieve AR and where passthrough should be named specifically, but this is no such feature as it is as applicable on a passthrough device such as the Quest, as it is on an optical AR device such as the Magic Leap 2.

**However**, I stress that this is my personal standpoint on the matter, so this is absolutely up for debate.

.. _doc_openxr_composition_layers:

OpenXR composition layers
=========================

Introduction
------------

In XR games you generally want to create user interactions that happen in 3D space 

> and involve users touching objects asif they are touching them in real life.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
and involve users touching objects as if they are touching them in real life.
```

> Sometimes however it is unavoidable to create more complex UIs
> using a more traditional 2D interface.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Sometimes however it is unavoidable to create a more traditional 2D interface.
```

In XR however you can't just add 2D components to your scene.
Godot needs depth information to properly position these elements so they appear at
a comfortable place for the user.
Even with depth information there are headsets with slanted displays that make it impossible 
for the standard 2D pipeline to correctly render the 2D elements.

The solution then is to render the UI to a :ref:`SubViewport <class_subviewport>`
and display the result of this using a :ref:`ViewportTexture <class_viewporttexture>` on a 3D mesh.

> The build in :ref:`QuadMesh <class_quadmesh>` is suitable option for this.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The :ref:`QuadMesh <class_quadmesh>` is a suitable option for this.
```

.. note::

>     See the `Gui in 3D <https://github.com/godotengine/godot-demo-projects/tree/master/viewport/gui_in_3d>`_

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    See the `GUI in 3D <https://github.com/godotengine/godot-demo-projects/tree/master/viewport/gui_in_3d>`_
```

    example project for an example of this approach.

The problem with displaying the viewport in this way is that the rendered result

> is sampled for lens distortion by the XR runtime and this can lead to a lot of quality loss 
> making text in the UI hard to read.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
is sampled for lens distortion by the XR runtime and the resulting quality loss 
can make UI text hard to read.
```

> OpenXR offers a solution to this problem through its composition layers implementation.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
OpenXR offers a solution to this problem through composition layers.
```

We simply add the correct composition layer node as a child node of
our :ref:`XROrigin3D <class_xrorigin3d>` node.
This is very important as the XR runtime positions everything in relation to our origin.

We want to position the composition layer so it is at eye height and roughly 1 to 1.5 meters
away from the player.

We now assign the SubViewport to the ``Layer Viewport`` property and enable Alpha Blend.

.. image:: img/openxr_composition_layer_quad.webp

.. note::
    As the player can walk away from the origin point,
    you will want to reposition the composition layer when the player recenters the view.
    Using the reference space ``Local Floor`` will apply this logic automatically.

Making the interface work
-------------------------

So far we're only displaying our UI, to make it work we need to add some code.
For this example we're going to keep things simple and
make one of the controllers work as a pointer.
We'll then simulate mouse actions with this pointer.

This code also requires a ``MeshInstance3D`` node called ``Pointer`` to be added
as a child to our ``OpenXRCompositionLayerQuad`` node.
We configure a ``SphereMesh`` with a radius ``0.01`` meters.

> We'll be using this as a helper to visualise where the user is pointing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We'll be using this as a helper to visualize where the user is pointing.
```

to simulate a button press and send that to our viewport for further processing.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

                elif is_pressed and !was_pressed:
                    # Button was pressed?
                    var event : InputEventMouseButton = InputEventMouseButton.new()
                    event.button_index = 1
                    event.button_mask = MOUSE_BUTTON_MASK_LEFT
                    event.pressed = true
                    event.position = _intersect_to_viewport_pos(intersect)
                    layer_viewport.push_input(event)

    ...

Next we remember our state for next frame.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

                was_pressed = is_pressed
                was_intersect = intersect

    ...

Finally, if we aren't intersecting, we simply clear our state.

.. code:: gdscript

    ...

            else:
                was_pressed = false
                was_intersect = NO_INTERSECTION

Hole punching
-------------

This is a feature that is specifically targeted at AR use cases as it requires our
main viewport to be configured with a transparent background.

As the composition layer is composited on top of the render result,

> it can be rendered infront of objects that are actually forward of the viewport.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
it can be rendered in front of objects that are actually forward of the viewport.
```

By enabling hole punch you instruct Godot to render a transparent object
where our viewport is displayed.
It does this in a way that fills the depth buffer and clears the current rendering result.
Anything behind our viewport will now be cleared,

> while anything infront of our viewport will be rendered as usual.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
while anything in front of our viewport will be rendered as usual.
```

.. _doc_openxr_composition_layers:

OpenXR composition layers
=========================

Introduction
------------

In XR games you generally want to create user interactions that happen in 3D space 
and involve users touching objects as if they are touching them in real life.

> Sometimes however it is unavoidable to create a more traditional 2D interface.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Sometimes however creating a more traditional 2D interface is unavoidable.
```
